en-US/Font_Info_&_Metadata.md, before:

---
published: true
layout: bookpage
weight: 20
category: workflow
title: Font Info & Metadata
---

## Element, Font Info

The Font Info window is ubiquitous in font editors, and FontForge closely follows the OpenType Specification. 
It may appear cryptic at first, but using it can help learn some familiarity with the OpenType format, and in turn reading about the OpenType format makes the dialog more approachable. 

<img src="images/info_ps_names.png"/>

## Family Naming

Microsoft works hard to ensure that a program written for a previous version of Windows will continue to run on the latest versions, enticing people to upgrade. This means that the basic TrueType font model introduced in Windows 3 is still with us, and Windows does not support font families with more than the 4 basic styles (Regular, Italic, Bold, Bold Italic.) 

This means for font designers that our font family names should be set up in a way that all our fonts can be used in all operating systems. The OpenType format allows for this, complementing the Family and Style Name values with "Preferred Family Name" and "Preferred Style Name" values that will take precedence in OpenType-aware software.

Here is a table, based on information shared by Polish font expert Adam Twardoch and discussed in the [Fontlab forum](http://forum.fontlab.com/index.php?topic=313.0):

| ShortName                                        | SGN                                   | SLN                              | FFN                                         | PSN                                                         | TFN                                      | TSN                                     | Weight                                                                        | Is Bold                                   | Is Italic                                          |
|--------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| Parameter Name                                   | Styling Group Name                    | Styling Link Name                | Full Font Name                              | PostScript Name                                             | Typographic Family Name                  | Typographic Style Name                  | Weight                                                                        | Styling Link “is bold”                    | Styling Link “is italic”                           |
| FontForge / Font Info                            | PS Names, Family name                 | PS Names, Weight                 | PS Names, Name for Humans                   | PS Name, Fontname                                           | TTF Names, OT Family Name                | TTF Names,                              | OS/2, Weight Class (numeric)                                                  | Mac, Mac Style Set, Bold                  | Mac, Mac Style Set, Italic / General, Italic Angle |
| FontLab Studio / Font Info / Names and Copyright | Family Name                           | Style Name                       | Full Name                                   | PS Font Name                                                | OpenType-specific names / OT Family Name | OpenType-specific names / OT Style Name | Weight (numeric)                                                              | Font is bold                              | Font is italic                                     |
| OpenType format fields                           | name.1.1.0.0, name.1.3.1.1033         | name.2.1.0.0, name.2.3.1.1033    | name.4.1.0.0, name.4.3.1.1033, CFF.FullName | name.6.1.0.0, name.6.3.1.1033, CFF.FontName                 | name.16.3.1.1033, CFF.FamilyName         | name.17.3.1.1033                        | CFF.Weight (OS/2.usWeightClass)                                               | head.macStyle.bit0, OS/2.fsSelection.bit5 | head.macStyle.bit1, OS/2.fsSelection.bit0          |
| Limitations                                      | length < 32 chars                     | length < 32 chars                | length < 64 chars                           | length < 30 chars, no spaces, only A-Za-z0-9 and one hyphen | length < 32 chars                        | length < 32 chars                       | value >= 250 and <= 900 in steps of 50, regular must be 400, bold must be 700 |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  |                                       |                                  |                                             |                                                             |                                          |                                         |                                                                               |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family Thin                           | Regular                          | Family Thin                                 | Family-Thin                                                 | Family                                   | Thin                                    | Thin (250)                                                                    |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family Light                          | Regular                          | Family Light                                | Family-LightItalic                                          | Family                                   | Light                                   | Light (300)                                                                   |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family                                | Regular                          | Family                                      | Family-Regular                                              | Family                                   | Regular                                 | Regular (400)                                                                 |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family Medium                         | Regular                          | Family Medium                               | Family-Medium                                               | Family                                   | Medium                                  | Medium (500)                                                                  |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family                                | Bold                             | Family Bold                                 | Family-Bold                                                 | Family                                   | Bold                                    | Bold (700)                                                                    | X                                         |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family Black                          | Regular                          | Family Black                                | Family-Black                                                | Family                                   | Black                                   | Black (900)                                                                   |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  |                                       |                                  |                                             |                                                             |                                          |                                         |                                                                               |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family Thin                           | Italic                           | Family Thin Italic                          | Family-ThinItalic                                           | Family                                   | Thin Italic                             | Thin (250)                                                                    |                                           | X                                                  |
|                                                  | Family Light                          | Italic                           | Family Light Italic                         | Family-LightItalic                                          | Family                                   | Light Italic                            | Light (300)                                                                   |                                           | X                                                  |
|                                                  | Family                                | Italic                           | Family Italic                               | Family-Italic                                               | Family                                   | Italic                                  | Regular (400)                                                                 |                                           | X                                                  |
|                                                  | Family Medium                         | Italic                           | Family Medium Italic                        | Family-MediumItalic                                         | Family                                   | Medium Italic                           | Medium (500)                                                                  |                                           | X                                                  |
|                                                  | Family                                | Bold Italic                      | Family Bold Italic                          | Family-BoldItalic                                           | Family                                   | Bold Italic                             | Bold (700)                                                                    | X                                         | X                                                  |
|                                                  | Family Black                          | Italic                           | Family Black Italic                         | Family-BlackItalic                                          | Family                                   | Black Italic                            | Black (900)                                                                   |                                           | X                                                  |
|                                                  |                                       |                                  |                                             |                                                             |                                          |                                         |                                                                               |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family Condensed                      | Regular                          | Family Condensed                            | FamilyCondensed-Regular                                     | Family                                   | Condensed                               | Regular (400)                                                                 |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family Condensed                      | Italic                           | Family Condensed Italic                     | FamilyCondensed-Italic                                      | Family                                   | Condensed Italic                        | Regular (400)                                                                 |                                           | X                                                  |

Also:

* Remove all NAME table keys with PID=1 - those are for MacOS 9 and earlier, and thus over 10 years behind us; and 
* Remove NAME table id 18 if present, it is only needed for MacOS 9 too

Commit message:

Update Font Info with semver tip

en-US/Font_Info_&_Metadata.md, after:

---
published: true
layout: bookpage
weight: 20
category: workflow
title: Font Info & Metadata
---

## Element, Font Info

The Font Info window is ubiquitous in font editors, and FontForge closely follows the OpenType Specification. 
It may appear cryptic at first, but using it can help learn some familiarity with the OpenType format, and in turn reading about the OpenType format makes the dialog more approachable. 

<img src="images/info_ps_names.png"/>

## Version Numbering

Follow the [Semantic Versioning](http://semver.org) convention for your fonts.

A MAJOR version would be after a complete redesign. Compare www.google.com/fonts/specimen/Exo and www.google.com/fonts/specimen/Exo+2 - if you have a document using Exo, you don't want to jump into Exo 2, because the 'voice' or 'flavor' -- the feeling evoked -- are (albeit maybe subtly) different.

A MINOR version would be anything that changes the metrics, such as respacing, improving kerning, or making minor corrections to some glyphs - http://c.fastcompany.net/multisite_files/fastcompany/imagecache/inline-large/inline/2014/07/3033126-inline-i-thenewroboto2.jpg from http://www.fastcodesign.com/3033126/roboto-rebooted-why-google-plans-to-update-its-font-like-the-rest-of-its-products - because such updates will cause documents using the font to reflow (albeit subtly in many cases)

A PATCH version would be anything that improves the font without changing the metrics or changes a glyph design in a visible way; 1.0.0 might not have fsType set to 0 or be run through fontcrunch, and changing both those things in a 1.0.1 release won't be visible or reflow anything.

If you release libre fonts, the [Github Releases](https://www.google.com/search?q=github+releases) features are very useful.

## Family Naming

Microsoft works hard to ensure that a program written for a previous version of Windows will continue to run on the latest versions, enticing people to upgrade. This means that the basic TrueType font model introduced in Windows 3 is still with us, and Windows does not support font families with more than the 4 basic styles (Regular, Italic, Bold, Bold Italic.) 

This means for font designers that our font family names should be set up in a way that all our fonts can be used in all operating systems. The OpenType format allows for this, complementing the Family and Style Name values with "Preferred Family Name" and "Preferred Style Name" values that will take precedence in OpenType-aware software.

Here is a table, based on information shared by Polish font expert Adam Twardoch and discussed in the [Fontlab forum](http://forum.fontlab.com/index.php?topic=313.0):

| ShortName                                        | SGN                                   | SLN                              | FFN                                         | PSN                                                         | TFN                                      | TSN                                     | Weight                                                                        | Is Bold                                   | Is Italic                                          |
|--------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| Parameter Name                                   | Styling Group Name                    | Styling Link Name                | Full Font Name                              | PostScript Name                                             | Typographic Family Name                  | Typographic Style Name                  | Weight                                                                        | Styling Link “is bold”                    | Styling Link “is italic”                           |
| FontForge / Font Info                            | PS Names, Family name                 | PS Names, Weight                 | PS Names, Name for Humans                   | PS Name, Fontname                                           | TTF Names, OT Family Name                | TTF Names,                              | OS/2, Weight Class (numeric)                                                  | Mac, Mac Style Set, Bold                  | Mac, Mac Style Set, Italic / General, Italic Angle |
| FontLab Studio / Font Info / Names and Copyright | Family Name                           | Style Name                       | Full Name                                   | PS Font Name                                                | OpenType-specific names / OT Family Name | OpenType-specific names / OT Style Name | Weight (numeric)                                                              | Font is bold                              | Font is italic                                     |
| OpenType format fields                           | name.1.1.0.0, name.1.3.1.1033         | name.2.1.0.0, name.2.3.1.1033    | name.4.1.0.0, name.4.3.1.1033, CFF.FullName | name.6.1.0.0, name.6.3.1.1033, CFF.FontName                 | name.16.3.1.1033, CFF.FamilyName         | name.17.3.1.1033                        | CFF.Weight (OS/2.usWeightClass)                                               | head.macStyle.bit0, OS/2.fsSelection.bit5 | head.macStyle.bit1, OS/2.fsSelection.bit0          |
| Limitations                                      | length < 32 chars                     | length < 32 chars                | length < 64 chars                           | length < 30 chars, no spaces, only A-Za-z0-9 and one hyphen | length < 32 chars                        | length < 32 chars                       | value >= 250 and <= 900 in steps of 50, regular must be 400, bold must be 700 |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  |                                       |                                  |                                             |                                                             |                                          |                                         |                                                                               |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family Thin                           | Regular                          | Family Thin                                 | Family-Thin                                                 | Family                                   | Thin                                    | Thin (250)                                                                    |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family Light                          | Regular                          | Family Light                                | Family-LightItalic                                          | Family                                   | Light                                   | Light (300)                                                                   |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family                                | Regular                          | Family                                      | Family-Regular                                              | Family                                   | Regular                                 | Regular (400)                                                                 |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family Medium                         | Regular                          | Family Medium                               | Family-Medium                                               | Family                                   | Medium                                  | Medium (500)                                                                  |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family                                | Bold                             | Family Bold                                 | Family-Bold                                                 | Family                                   | Bold                                    | Bold (700)                                                                    | X                                         |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family Black                          | Regular                          | Family Black                                | Family-Black                                                | Family                                   | Black                                   | Black (900)                                                                   |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  |                                       |                                  |                                             |                                                             |                                          |                                         |                                                                               |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family Thin                           | Italic                           | Family Thin Italic                          | Family-ThinItalic                                           | Family                                   | Thin Italic                             | Thin (250)                                                                    |                                           | X                                                  |
|                                                  | Family Light                          | Italic                           | Family Light Italic                         | Family-LightItalic                                          | Family                                   | Light Italic                            | Light (300)                                                                   |                                           | X                                                  |
|                                                  | Family                                | Italic                           | Family Italic                               | Family-Italic                                               | Family                                   | Italic                                  | Regular (400)                                                                 |                                           | X                                                  |
|                                                  | Family Medium                         | Italic                           | Family Medium Italic                        | Family-MediumItalic                                         | Family                                   | Medium Italic                           | Medium (500)                                                                  |                                           | X                                                  |
|                                                  | Family                                | Bold Italic                      | Family Bold Italic                          | Family-BoldItalic                                           | Family                                   | Bold Italic                             | Bold (700)                                                                    | X                                         | X                                                  |
|                                                  | Family Black                          | Italic                           | Family Black Italic                         | Family-BlackItalic                                          | Family                                   | Black Italic                            | Black (900)                                                                   |                                           | X                                                  |
|                                                  |                                       |                                  |                                             |                                                             |                                          |                                         |                                                                               |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family Condensed                      | Regular                          | Family Condensed                            | FamilyCondensed-Regular                                     | Family                                   | Condensed                               | Regular (400)                                                                 |                                           |                                                    |
|                                                  | Family Condensed                      | Italic                           | Family Condensed Italic                     | FamilyCondensed-Italic                                      | Family                                   | Condensed Italic                        | Regular (400)                                                                 |                                           | X                                                  |

Also:

* Remove all NAME table keys with PID=1 - those are for MacOS 9 and earlier, and thus over 10 years behind us; and 
* Remove NAME table id 18 if present, it is only needed for MacOS 9 too
